



Network Working Group                                       L. Johansson
Internet-Draft                                          SIROS Foundation
Intended status: Informational                          19 December 2025
Expires: 22 June 2026


                  Use cases for Zero Knowledge Proofs
                  draft-johansson-zkp-usecases-latest

Abstract

   Zero Knowledge Proof technology relies on mathematical constructs
   that enable a sender to proove to a receiver that a piece of
   information has a certain agreed property without revealing that
   information or its source to the sender.  An example commonly given
   is the problem of prooving that a subject is older than a certain age
   without revealing the exact age or any other information to a
   receiver.  This document attempts to catalogue real world usecases
   for such technology.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://leifj.github.io/draft-johansson-zkp-usecases/draft-johansson-
   zkp-usecases.html.  Status information for this document may be found
   at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-johansson-zkp-usecases/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/leifj/draft-johansson-zkp-usecases.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 22 June 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Why deploy ZKP?
   4.  Use cases
     4.1.  Proof of age
     4.2.  Proof of human
     4.3.  Proof of liveness
     4.4.  Proof of membership
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   There are several ways to define the concept of zero knowledge
   proofs.  In this document we will rely on the SPICE architecture
   document to provide us with the basic terminology and use the
   following definition: A zero knowledge proof (zkp) is a mechanism by
   which the holder can proove to the verifier that a statement (S) is
   true without providing the verifier with any additional information
   other than the truthfullness of S.  A zkp mechanism is usually
   required to satisfy three properties:

   *  completeness: if S is true, then a compliant implementation of the
      mechanism will accept the proof presented by another compliant
      implementation.

   *  soundness: a non-compliant holder can't make a compliant
      implementation accept that S is true when it is in fact false.

   *  zero knowledge: if S is true, then a verifier is not able to
      derive any other information than the fact that S is true from the
      mechanism.

   Zero knowledge mechanisms fulfil many privacy requirements, for
   instance:

   *  holder-verifier unlinkability

   *  issuer-verifier unlinkability (aka collusion-resistant
      unlinkability)

   These properties come at a cost in terms of implementation
   complexity.  Zero knowledge proofs are both different from
   conventional cryptography and often hard to implement and understand.
   Additionally, the fact that zkp ensures unlinkability means that some
   use-cases that depend on linkability may not translate into
   architectures that rely on zkp.  This means that even if zkp is
   deployed, the information required in the proofs (i.e., the S) may in
   some cases be enough to fully identify the data subject, in which
   case the deployment of zkp serves little purpose.

   This document aims to describe some real-world use cases where the
   deployment of zkp makes sense from a business and technical
   perspective.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   We also rely on the terminology from the SPICE architecture document.

3.  Why deploy ZKP?

   ZKP mechanisms are fundamentally about proving claims about data
   subjects with no (zero) auxiliary information leakage.  However, ZKP
   isn't the only method for addressing information leakage in the
   three-party architecture.  Using [RFC9901], also known as selective
   disclosure JSON Web Tokens (SD-JWT), it is possible to achieve many,
   but not all, common privacy requirements.  Specifically, it is not
   possible to prevent information leakage that results from collusion
   between the issuer and verifier.

   In situations where collusion resistance is required and SD-JWTs (and
   similar solutions) are ineffective, ZKP becomes a clear alternative.
   However, even in situations where collusion resistance isn't
   necessary, ZKP is sometimes a convenient alternative to other
   selective disclosure solutions for operational reasons.  For
   instance, a common way to deploy SD-JWTs is to use so-called batch
   issuance.  In order to achieve verifier-verifier unlinkability, the
   issuer provides the holder with a set of identical copies (a batch)
   of a given SD-JWT, each signed with a unique key.  Whenever the
   holder generates a presentation to the verifier, one of the SD-JWTs
   is "consumed", making them effectively one-time-use.

   There are situations where the salted hash approach used in SD-JWTs
   and mdocs [TK:add ISO reference] provides adequate privacy
   protection.  However, in order to achieve verifier-verifier
   unlinkability, the issuer creates N copies and N signatures each time
   an SD-JWT is issued.  Since this has to be repeated every time the
   batch "runs dry" at the holder, the issuer has to perform a large and
   recurring number of signatures.  Depending on how the infrastructure
   is set up, it may be cheaper from an operational point of view to use
   a ZKP mechanism, where a single credential can be issued and reused
   by the holder for as long as it remains valid.

   In some jurisdictions, legal requirements are being established to
   ensure enhanced privacy protection for the use of online services.
   Some legal regimes establish requirements that imply that only the
   minimal set of information required for each transaction must be
   transmitted.  In such situations, it may be useful (but certainly not
   always required) to consider deploying ZKP technology.  Some legal
   requirements take this further and outright require ZKP technology.
   One such example is the [eIDAS] regulation.  However, even in the
   case of eIDAS, the development of zkp schemes has effectively led to
   a "soft" requirement until development and standardization efforts
   have caught up with legal requirements.

4.  Use cases

4.1.  Proof of age

   Proof of age means the ability to prove that a subject is above or
   below a required age.  Commonly cited use cases include access to
   mature or age-limited content (e.g., online gambling).  Proof of age
   is also relevant when the subject needs to prove that he or she is
   below a certain age limit, for instance, when the subject is
   accessing an online service intended for, and meant to be a safe
   space for, children.

   A proof of age can be produced using a so-called range-proof from a
   credential that contains an authentic date of birth or an authentic
   age claim for the subject.

4.2.  Proof of human

   Proof of human means the ability to prove that a subject is human.
   This could be achieved by producing a ZKP proof from a credential
   that is only given to humans.  It is often presumed that a passport
   or similar travel document, or the Personal Identity Document (PID)
   credentials envisioned by the eIDAS regulation, will only be provided
   to humans, but it is by no means certain that all countries and
   organizations that issue recognized ICAO travel documents would only
   issue them to persons (humans).  ICAO guidelines do not explicitly
   require that only humans are allowed to obtain a passport or an
   emergency travel document, but the term "person" suggests that this
   is the intended meaning [tk: reference to ICAO guidelines].

   The reason proof of human may be interesting follows from the
   increased use of semi-autonomous agents that sometimes act
   independently or on loosely formulated instructions (prompts) from a
   human.  It may be useful to distinguish between actions taken by a
   human and those taken by an agent as a result of a prompt, as well as
   those taken independently of any human interaction.  Such actions are
   sometimes, but not always, recorded together with identifiable
   information, and the use of zkp allows the trust in the "human-ness"
   to be separated from any trust in the agent holding the authorization
   for the act itself.

4.3.  Proof of liveness

   In the three-party model, a credential is issued to a digital
   "wallet" under the control of the subject.  Cryptographic controls,
   also known as holder binding, are used to ensure that a given
   credential is issued to a specific wallet.  Cryptographic binding,
   however, cannot ensure that the subject is the only one able to
   control the wallet; it is sometimes necessary to verify that a
   particular subject is in direct control of the wallet device.  This
   is sometimes referred to as liveness checks and is commonly used when
   issuing credentials based on travel documents, driver's licenses, and
   other documents that contain biometric data that can be matched with
   a subject.  Liveness checks are carried out in order to ensure (to
   some degree) that the subject is physically present instead of (say)
   having their actions emulated by software.

   A liveness credential is a representation of a recent liveness check,
   and the use of ZKP enables a verifier to have confidence that a
   trusted liveness verification has been done without providing any
   additional information.  It would be possible to combine the liveness
   check with an identity verification in the holder to prove that the
   same individual holding a particular form of identity document (such
   as a PID) was recently present and in control of the holder's device.

4.4.  Proof of membership

   Many relationships can be represented as membership in a group; a
   subject is a student if they are a member of the group of students
   (at a particular institution), a subject is Danish if they are a
   member of the group of Danish citizens, etc.  The tautology aside,
   proof of membership is a common requirement for various purposes,
   such as discount systems and eligibility for specific business
   transactions.  Examples include discounts for senior citizens and
   proof of a valid driver's license before renting a trailer, among
   others.  Many of these cases do not require proof of identity beyond
   the proof of membership and any additional documentation required for
   the economic transaction.

5.  Security Considerations

   This document does not specify any protocols or interoperability
   requirements.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [eIDAS]    "Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 of the European Parliament and
              of the Council of 11 April 2024 amending Regulation (EU)
              No 910/2014 as regards establishing the European Digital
              Identity Framework", n.d.,
              <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1183/oj/eng>.

Acknowledgments

   Peter Altman Drummond Reed

Author's Address

   Leif Johansson
   SIROS Foundation
   Email: leifj@siros.org
